== Andrioid overview ==
* linux-based platform which runs on mobile phones and pads. 
* has a considerable market share

== Android development ==
* Java SDK with emulators 
** Eclipse plugin
* Native SDK available for special cases

== Android devices ==
* Hundreds of devices, mostly touch screen
* [http://developer.android.com/resources/dashboard/platform-versions.html Most devices] are at runtime 2.1 or later, latest and greatest is 4.0.3. 
* Multiple resolutions and aspect ratios, keyboard configurations.

= Task 1 - hello world =
=== a. Setup ===
* create new Android project called 'HelloWorld'
* start project with 'run as Android application'. 
** Create a new virtual device

Slide to unlock emulator.

=== b. Change hello world text ===
* change text from 'Hello world' to 'Hello Antares'

Hint: Check the files in the res directory

=== c. Add button ===
Add a button to GUI by modifying main.xml in res/layout. Add the XML

    <Button android:id="@+id/button"
            android:layout_width="wrap_content"
            android:layout_height="wrap_content"
            android:text="Hello, I am a Button" 
    />

=== d. Use XML button from code ===
Access XML-generated button instance from within the HelloWorldActivity.onCreate(..) method.

Hint: Use the method findViewById(..) method together with autogenerated class R.id.xxx.

=== e. Add button click listener ===
Connect a click listener to the button and log text on click:

            Log.d(getClass.getSimpleName(), "Button was clicked!");

Hint: Use method Button.setOnClickListener(..).
Hint: Show view 'LogCat' in Eclipse

= Task 2 - create new Activity =
Check out the topmost figure in [http://developer.android.com/reference/android/app/Activity.html Android documentation].

== a. Create a new Activity class ==
Create a new class 'MyActivity' with extends the Activity class. Copy the 'onCreate' method from HelloWorldActivity.

== b. Create a new layout for MyActivity ==
Create a new layout xml file in res/layout. Change the MyActivity.onCreate class so that it loads the new layout file.

== c. Start 'MyActivity' ==
Start the activity from the button click listener in task 1. 

Launch the new activity like this: 

    Intent i = new Intent(this, MyActivity.class);
    startActivity(i);

= Task 3 - on-deviec debugging =
Put the Andorid phone in developer mode. Connect your Android phone to your PC using an USB. 

Launch the application on your phone!

= Task 4 - different screen resolutions =
== a. resource folders ==
Determine what the resource folders
- drawable-ldpi
- drawable-mdpi
- drawable-hdpi 

are used for. 

== b. image view ==
Create directory 'res/drawable' and copy file [http://www.mediafire.com/imgbnc.php/1ba890f73cfdc925e08b13fe34d5141e6g.jpg android] into the directory. Then add the following to main.xml:

    <ImageView 
      android:id="@+id/android_image"
      android:src="@drawable/android"
      android:layout_width="wrap_content"
      android:layout_height="wrap_content"
    />

Use AVD Manager to create multiple virtual (emulator) devices to see how different devices see the same image. Then add scaled versions to ldpi, mdpi and hdpi and try again.